I have to tell you that we have been doing a lot of these community kick off rallies since I announced that I was running for president on back on February 10 and we have been drawing extraordinary crowds and generating enormous energy and typically these are fun and raucous affairs. I come out and I deliver -- if I've got the energy -- a stemwinder and folks are cheering and we've got flags and balloons and music is piped in and usually I think we have Aretha Franklin and Bono or somebody to get everybody fired up. But as the mayor said we didn't think that was appropriate today and I hope that people don't feel a little bit cheated because we didn't think it was appropriate.

As you all know 33 people lost their lives today, this morning. Most of them were of the age of many of the young people in this audience, they were going to class, they had their lives in front of them, their parents were proud of them and looking forward to having them home for summer or visiting them on campus and their lives were cut short in a tragic and random fashion. And so it makes all of hearts ache, particularly those of us who are parents. I have an eight-year-old daughter Maila and a five-year-old daughter Sasha and they describe all that I hold dear in the world and so when I hear stories like this I think from the perspective of a parent and I try to imagine what that must be like - not even just the parents of those that were killed or wounded but a parent who knows their child is there and is uncertain as to whether they were in that class or participated in one of the venues that was struck. And it makes us think about violence in this society.

On the way up I asked my staff to pull a quote, or pull the speech that Robert Kennedy delivered after Dr. King had been assassinated. Riots were taking place all across the country. This is a famous speech that Bobby Kennedy delivered at the City Club in Cleveland. And he said:
And a day later Dr. King came down and gathered people together and said, 'Don't lose hope. The arch of the moral universe is long and but it bends toward justice," that's what he said. And because they didn't lose hope, thousands of people from across the country came together and those thousands marched and as they came upon the bridge - just as the Red Sea parted so many years before - suddenly, those horses and those billy clubs parted and they marched straight on through, to the capitol and the Voting Rights Act was passed only a few weeks later